
We rarely feature sculptures, because I believe that showing them on 2D photo won't give you a proper vision what they are really like. But today is the birthday of one of the greatest neoclassicist sculptor, born in 1757. I've seen a lot of his works when I travelled to Venice last month and even though you want be able to see the perfection of his work fully, I've decided to present today one of his most famous masterpieces: "Psyche Revived by Cupid's Kiss". The sculpture shows the mythological lovers at a moment of great emotion, characteristic of the emerging movement of Romanticism. It represents the god Cupid in the height of love and tenderness, immediately after awakening the lifeless Psyche with a kiss. Canova's technique in carving marble contrasts their realistic smooth skin with the surrounding elements. Loosely draped around Psyche’s lower body, a sheet further emphasizes the difference between the texture of skin and drapery. Rough texture provides the basis of the rock upon which the composition is placed supplementing the distinctions of elements. Fine curls and lines make up the hair and light feathery details create realistic wings upon the landing Cupid.Why Psyche fall asleep? The beautiful nymph had been warned by Venus against opening the jar she was given to collect a scrap of beauty from Proserpina for Venus: "’But I give you one especially strong warning. Do not open or peep into the [jar] you carry, and repress all curiosity as to the "Imprisoned Treasure of Divine Beauty".’” But she gave way to curiosity just as she had returned from her voyage into the Underworld, peering into the jar to take some of the Divine Beauty for herself. However, Proserpina had not filled it with the Beauty, but rather with the “Sleep of the Innermost Darkness, the night of Styx, which freed from its cell rushed upon her and penetrated her whole body with a heavy cloud of unconsciousness and unfolded her where she lay.”Luckily, Cupid fell in love with her and woke her up. Never disobey Greek gods' commands!Help us and donate so we will be able to release the new version of DailyArt this autumn: http://support.getdailyart.com
