
No medieval woman was more controversial than Eleanor of Aquitaine. Born c. 1122 CE, she inherited the duchy of Aquitaine in southern France in 1137, making her the most eligible heiress in western Europe. First married to King Louis VII of France, powerful churchmen in his court denounced her suggestive dress and sexuality. She further shocked contemporaries when she insisted upon accompanying her husband on the disastrous Second Crusade, insisting that she lead the soldiers recruited from her home territory in person. After fifteen years of marriage and only two daughters to show for her husband's minimal attentions to her, Louis granted her the annulment she sought in 1152.Many medieval women would have lived out their remaining days in retirement. Not Eleanor. Two months after her break with her first husband, she married Henry II of England. Their tumultuous relationship produced eight children, including two kings: Richard, nicknamed "Lionheart" and John, the infamous signer of the Magna Carta. Eleanor spent sixteen years in captivity in England beginning in 1173 after she supported her sons' revolt against their father. Upon Henry's death, she was released, and she continued to play an important role in English government until her retirement and death in 1204.This wall painting was discovered in 1964 in the chapel of Sainte-Radegonde in the church that bears her name in Chinon, high on the wall between an archway and a corner. Scholars believe that it was painted between 1170 and 1200, but the subject of the painting remains somewhat uncertain. Many believe that the scene most likely depicts the English royal family, but several scenarios have been suggested, such as a hunting party, the wedding of King John, or perhaps even Eleanor being led off into captivity by her wronged second husband. It is likely, however, that the central figure in this image is Eleanor of Aquitaine, making this the only contemporary likeness of the famous, and infamous, twice-crowned-queen in existence today.
- Stephanie
We need your help - we need $20,000 to create the new version of DailyArt for Android devices. Find out more here. Thank you!
