
Apropos of Independence Day, this painting is one of about 30 American flag paintings by Childe Hassam, and fittingly, it hangs in the White House.
Hassam created his flag series during and immediately after World War I, an intensely patriotic time. A fervent supporter of the Allied cause from the beginning, he offered to record the war in Europe but did not receive approval from the government. His inspiration for the series was a Preparedness Parade attended by thousands on Fifth Avenue to support U.S. involvement in the war. This particular scene was painted in February 1917, just five weeks before the United States declared war on Germany, when tensions between the two countries were reaching a climax.
Named after an uncle and descended from a long line of New Englanders, Hassam is arguably the most dedicated and successful of the American Impressionists. He was inspired by the French Impressionists during a three-year stay in Paris, and the influence of Claude Monet is apparent: Monet had painted two scenes of flag-draped avenues in 1878 and was known for recurring motifs in his paintings. The Avenue in the Rain is the most impressionistic of Hassam’s flag series. Depicting a succession of American flags prominently displayed over Fifth Avenue, the scene appears to be viewed through a rain-streaked window, an unusual perspective. Although clearly identifiable, the massive flags, which project from unseen buildings, are distorted as are the dark figures holding umbrellas. Outdoor scenes rendered under various weather conditions are a hallmark of Impressionism.
Hassam was a prolific painter during his career: his output numbered over 3,000 works in various media such as oils, watercolors, etchings, and lithographs. His subject matter was also wide-ranging, including street scenes, coastal landscapes, flower gardens, and interiors. The Avenue in the Rain is one of six Hassam works in the permanent White House collection. Donated in 1963 by financier Thomas Mellon Evans during the Presidency of John F. Kennedy, it was initially hung in the President’s Bedroom and later in the President’s Dining Room for many years. Most recently, under Presidents Clinton and Obama, the painting was displayed in the Oval Office.
- Martina
Happy Independence Day folks!
Zuzanna & the DailyArt team
