
"...I then did ask of her, her changeling child; Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent. To bear him to my bower in fairy land." -Oberon, fairy king
Arthur Rackham (1867-1939) was one of the 20th century’s leading illustrators. Known for his delightful, whimsical, and distinct pen and ink drawings for children’s literature and fairy tales, Rackham became a popular and respected artist culminating with an exhibition at the Louvre in Paris in 1914.
Rackham was born in Lewisham, England, as one of twelve children; he showed an early interest and talent in art and studied at an art school in London. He was unsure of a career as a starving artist, however, and took a job as a clerk at age 18. He soon discovered his passion for drawing was too great to be ignored so he quit his job and found another as a reporter and illustrator. He began developing into a very talented illustrator and as his reputation grew he was commissioned to illustrate numerous children’s books including Peter Pan, Alice in Wonderland, and Fairy Tales of the Brothers Grimm.
A perfect example of a Rackham work can be seen in Dover’s Publication of A Midsummer’s Night Dream by William Shakespeare. Rackham creates a whimsical, magical effect as he illustrates one of the fairies transporting the cherubic, smiling baby to Fairy Land as requested by Oberon, King of the Fairies. Rackham used pen and ink paired with subtle use of watercolors to create this ethereal image. For color illustrations, he would begin painting by building up many thin washes of watercolor creating translucent tints. His beautiful illustrations brought the pages to life and was indicative of his originality and style.
Rackham’s works regained popularity over the years following his death in 1939 from cancer. His drawings and paintings are still highly sought after by major international art auction houses and the many children’s books he has illustrated continue to delight both children and adults alike around the world.
- Heidi Werber
