
The Kongouro from New Holland was commissioned by Sir Joseph Banks (1743–1820) following his participation in Captain James Cook’s first voyage to the Pacific (1768–71), which was also the first British voyage devoted exclusively to scientific discovery. Banks is a major figure in the development of European natural history and was an important patron of science and the arts. The painting was executed by George Stubbs (1724–1806), the foremost animal painter in Britain during the 18th century, within two years of Banks’ return. Together with Portrait of a Large Dog (Dingo), they are the most significant artistic productions directly related to the voyage, and the earliest painted representations of these iconic animals in Western art. The paintings were exhibited as a pair in London in 1773 and have remained together in the UK ever since.
Cook’s Endeavour voyage, and the two that followed (1772–75 and 1776–80), ushered in a new era of European maritime exploration that would have profound significance for the cultures, politics, and societies of both explorer and explored. While far from uninterested in the economic and political possibilities of exploration, these three state-sponsored projects were motivated to a great extent by the desire to improve navigation and gain knowledge of uncharted lands, seas, peoples, plants, and animals. Cook’s ships were in effect floating laboratories carrying astronomers, artists, and natural scientists as well as seamen who collected, sketched, painted, measured, and recorded what they saw. The voyages both reflected and came to define the ideals of the Enlightenment and served as models for the equally ambitious British, Spanish, French, and Russian voyages of exploration that followed into the Pacific. All three of Cook’s voyages produced significant scientific results. 
We present today's painting thanks to Royal Museums Greenwich. : )
P.S. Wildlife was a popular subject in 18th and 19th century painting. See Rosa Bonheur’s magnificent depictions of lions here!
