
We present today's glass set thanks to Slovak National Museum - Museum of History in Bratislava, where you visit Two as One – Design of Czech and Slovak glass 1918-2018 exhbition. It presents a joint project of Museum of Glass and Jewellery in Jablonec nad Nisou, Museum of Decorativve Arts in UPM Prague, Museum of Glass in Lednické Rovne and Slovak National Museum - Museum of History in Bratislava.
The drinking set Golden Zuzana became the symbol of high craft level. The invention was  based on centuries-old domestic tradition and it was a symbol of manually produced Slovak glass design from the second half of the 20th century. It was produced until the beginning of the 21st century. Jozef Stanik, glassmaker and designer, began to experiment with the form of this type of glass in 1954. Two years later, the design started to be produced. The success was immediate, both exhibition and commercial. Therefore, in 1957, Stanik received a state award – the Order of Work. The first big orders for Golden Zuzana set came from USA and Canada. There were produced 11–17 wagons of this kind of glass per month. Originally, the collection had only a production number. It was the customers from Montreal that gave this collection a name after the wife of one of the businessman. Soon after, almost every Slovak family had this collection at home as well. In total, there were sold 5 million pieces of cups and glasses of different kinds. Golden Zuzana was also quite a prestigious state gift. In 1963, it was given to the first woman in space, Valentina Thereskova. In 1981, it was given to English prince Charles and his bride Diana Spencer as a wedding gift.
P.S. Glass as a material exists in the art for a long time. It was used during the Middle Ages for making amazing windows and dishes. Explore the world of medieval glassmakers at Musee de Cluny here!
Dear DailyArt users, if you need artsy calendars for 2020 we have something for you! Check what you can buy on our new DailyArt online shop: Women Artists Monthly Wall Calendar, Masterpieces Monthly Wall Calendar and Weekly Desk Calendar, with beautiful masterpieces and short stories about them. We ship worldwide! And any feedback is appreciated :)
