
This interesting miniature is a posthumous rendition of Emperor Jalal al-Din Akbar that was created during the reign of his grandson Shah Jahan by the talented court painter, Govardhan. 
Govardhan’s works are known for the insightful depth of emotion in the depiction of his subjects and that is apparent in these pictures. Akbar is shown here as a greying elderly man. Since Govardhan joined the Mughal service during the reign of Akbar this painting is likely based on Govardhan’s own memory of Akbar, perhaps of how he last remembered the king.
The cherubs in the top half of the painting, particularly with a European-style crown is a fascinating detail for a Mughal painting indicating the clear influence of European art on Mughal painters and lending more to the image of Akbar as he was remembered after his death – “Arsh-Ashiyani’ or “the one who nests at the divine throne’. 
The idyllic village in the background of the painting along with the lion and the calf laying peacefully side by side is meant to convey the peaceful reign of this beloved ruler where everyone lived in harmony. Govardhan’s remarkable attention to detail is evident also in the subtle expressions of the two animals. Though the calf is seated comfortably, his eyes betray his nervousness. Possibly due to the proximity of the lion watching him and bearing his teeth.
The inscription in the lower border of the painting says, ‘work of Govardhan’ and is believed to be in Shah Jahan’s own hand!
- Maya Tola
BTW., we hope that until the end of the year DailyArt will be available in Hindi, Arabic and Japanese. Just to let you know! :) Now, dive into the amazing world of miniature paintings of the Mughal Empire here <3
Dear DailyArt users, if you need artsy calendars for 2020 we have something for you! Check what you can buy on our new DailyArt online shop: Women Artists Monthly Wall Calendar, Masterpieces Monthly Wall Calendar and Weekly Desk Calendar, with beautiful masterpieces and short stories about them. We ship worldwide!
