
This painting can be seen in the Stedelijk's latest exhibition, Chagall, Picasso, Mondrian and Others: Migrant Artists in Paris. It presents art from the superb collection of the Stedelijk Museum, and includes work by more than 50 artists, photographers, and graphic designers. The show ends on 2 February 2020; don't miss it!
Both Pablo Picasso and the Dutch painter Kees van Dongen moved to Paris around 1900. Because they did not speak the language well and were unfamiliar with the culture, they were outsiders there. Like many other artists, Picasso and Van Dongen found studios in Montmartre. There they painted what they saw around them: the poor, prostitutes, and street performers (also outsiders). In addition, they familiarized themselves with the art that could be seen everywhere in Paris. Edgar Degas and the Swiss artist Théophile Steinlen also became sources of inspiration.
To stand out among the many other artists, bold steps were needed. Picasso and Van Dongen soon opted for radical modernism, in which experiments with colors, materials, and differing perspectives played an important role. Fauvism was the most innovative style until 1907, but Picasso’s cubism was truly revolutionary by comparison. Van Dongen’s portrait of an old clown is fauvist in style.
Artists who worked in this way came from all over the world. They were driven by the idea that art can best reflect one’s own time. In Paris they forged an international modernism, shaped by artists with their own, distinctive ideas. Moreover, this modernism also provided them access to ambitious art dealers, influential critics, and an international circle of wealthy collectors who were keen to stay abreast of the spirit of the times.
P.S. In Midnight in Paris Woody Allen gives a sneak-peek into the Paris art world. Check here which artists appear in the famous film and by whom they are portrayed!
P.P.S. Dear users, we are looking for volunteers who could help us with translating DailyArt to Korean, Farsi and some other languages. If you're interested, please fill in this form <3
